Hello, and welcome back
to a more conceptual lecture this time.
This is probably one of the most important lectures
of the entire course.
I promise you that we are going to go back
to some serious coding after this section,
but since you signed up for an advanced CSS course,
we need to get into some advanced stuff
before moving on in the course and in our project.
Now, I couldn't really call this course
an advanced CSS course if I wouldn't show you
some of the stuff that happens behinds the scenes
of CSS as we load the webpage, right?
Now most, if not all, of the the other courses out there,
they just teach you the coding stuff itself,
but in my courses, I like to teach you
how stuff actually works, and important concepts
that you need to understand in order to become
a better web developer and, in this case,
a better CSS developer.
That's what I did in my Java script course,
if you took that one.
And that's what I do in this course as well.
So, let's take a look now.
And we start by asking what actually happens to our CSS code
when we load up a certain web page in a browser.
Now, a bunch of stuff happens behind the scenes
of the internet, until the browser can start loading
that website we requested.
Things like http requests, figuring out
the right domain name service, etc.
We're not going to focus on all of that though.
Instead, we're only interested in what happens
in the browser on a computer where the user opens the page.
So, our starting point is when the browser actually starts
to load the initial html file.
It then takes the loaded html code and parses it,
which basically means that it decodes the code
line by line.
From this process, the browser builds the so-called
Document Object Model, or DOM, which basically describes
the entire web document, basically like a family tree,
with parents, children, and sibling elements.
So, this Document Object Model is where the entire decoded
html code is stored.
Now, as the browser parses the html, it also finds
the style sheets included in the html head,
and it starts loading them as well.
And just like the html, CSS is also parsed,
but the parsing of CSS is a bit more complex.
And that's why we'll talk about that in great detail
in the next lecture.
For now, let me just tell you that during the CSS parsing
phase, there are two main steps.
First off, conflicting CSS declarations are resolved
through a process known as the cascade.
The second step in a CSS parsing
is to process final CSS values.
For instance, converting a margin defined
in percentage units to pixels.
Imagine that we define the left margin as 50%,
but that 50% on a smartphone is completely different
than a 50% on a large screen, right?
And that's why these percentages, and other relative units,
can only be calculated on the user's device
in the parsing phase.
But, again, we're going to talk more about that
over the next lectures.
And, of course, I'm going to show you all of this
in code as well because that's obviously the whole point
of learning all of this.
Alright, now after all of this is done,
the final CSS is also stored in a tree-like structure
called the CSS Object Model, similar to the DOM.
And now that we have the html, as well as the CSS parsed
and stored, these together form the so-called Render Tree.
And with that, we finally have everything we need
to render the page.
Now, in order to actually render the page,
the browser using something called
the Visual Formatting Model.
The algorithm calculates and uses a bunch of stuff
that you already know about,
like the box model, floats, and positioning.
We're going to talk a little bit about how
this Visual Formatting Model works
in one of the next lectures, because it actually has a lot
to do about how we write our code.
So, stay tuned for that lecture.
Okay, and so finally, after the Visual Formatting Model
has done it's work, the website it's finally rendered,
or painted, to the screen and the process is finished.
Great!
So, now you understand what happens behind the scenes
of a page load in a browser.
And over the next couple of lectures, you're going
to understand it even better and even deeper.
So, I hope that you're curious now.
So let's move on to the next lecture right now.